Want to tell you about a man
who is said
to be the Hamas leader
who is central to this war
and the release of hostages.
He's also a key target for Israel.
Sam Kiley has more
on the leader of Hamas in Gaza.
What Israel wants this man dead.
Yayha Sinwar
The leader of Hamas in Gaza.
In the face of evil in the end
is Yayha Sinwar
Well, that man is in our sights.
All his team are and will get to them.
He was first convicted in 1988
for the murder of two Israeli soldiers
and four Palestinians
suspected of collaboration with Israel.
And he spent two decades
in an Israeli prison studying his enemy,
the founder of Hamas
internal security force.
He had hunted alleged
collaborators with zeal and
brothers and was among the movement's
biggest prizes
when over a thousand
Palestinian prisoners
were released in 2011.
For Gilad Shalit,
an Israeli soldier held hostage in Gaza
for five years, he said,
there is no doubt
that this is a nationalistic moment,
par excellence.
It is one of the big strategic monuments
in the history of our cause.
He quickly became head of Hamas
military wing
and on election to the Gaza
leadership in 2017,
effectively abolished
its civilian branch,
ostracized by Egypt over its support
for political Islam.
He repaired friendships with Cairo
and built
regional relationships
that entrenched Hamas power.
It really needed to have
also good relations
with the key Arab state that also shares
the only era border with the Gaza Strip
and with Iran that could supply Hamas
with military and logistical support.
Iran has poured military support
into Hamas under him,
and Qatar has been a major backer
of civilian projects.
He was soon in Israel's crosshairs.
Quite literally,
the IDF tried to kill him in May 20, 21.
Ten days later, he laid out his strategy.
He said
if the world doesn't
take action to stop it, meaning Israel,
there will be a religious war
in the region.
And he soon appeared in Gaza
alongside Egypt's intelligence
chief, Abbas Kamel.
For us,
the US is now relying on Egypt and Qatar
as key players
to try to secure the safe
release of Hamas's 200 captives.
Their main point of contact
is likely Sinwar.
unless Israel fulfills
its promise to kill them.
Sam Kiley, CNN.
The move of
well, a major unanswered question
here is what was Hamas
thinking with their terror attack?
That is the headline for an article
by a journalist at The New Yorker
who recently asked that of a senior
political Hamas official
who is living in in Doha in Qatar.
David Kirkpatrick, who coauthored
that piece, has covered
the region extensively.
He joins us now.
David, the article you wrote
is is fascinating.
What what were they thinking?
You know,
the picture that emerged was desperation.
I should tell you
that when my colleague Adam
Rasgon and I,
both Rasgon
and I spoke to Mousa Abu Marzouk,
he was at pains to say, no,
we have not despaired, we're strong.
But the takeaway was
that they basically feel like their backs
against are against the wall.
It was a, you know, a familiar
litany of grievances
about the occupation,
about Israeli settlements
in the West Bank,
about the management
of the Al-Aqsa mosque,
which is very important to Palestinians
and Muslims everywhere.
But added to
that was an increased sense
of desperation
because of the right wing government
around Netanyahu,
because of the messages
that it's conveying
about its lack of receptivity
to any kind of
Palestinian political entity
alongside side Israel.
And also a sense of betrayal
as the other Arab states
more and more accommodate
themselves to Israel,
you know, begin to recognize
Israel and Saudi Arabia,
the most important of those.
The latest in line
to make an agreement like that.
So it's really a time
when I think from his point of view,
little choice.
So for for Hamas, it would be a success.
If you can talk about the murder
of so many civilians
as a success
in their in their calculus,
as if that Saudi deal
does not go through.
Saudi Arabia does not recognize
the state of Israel.
And also,
they have these hostages
who they have wanted to trade in the past
and I assume want to trade now.
Yeah, that's all true.
You know,
and we pressed him
on the sort of intelligible
strategic reasons.
You know,
did you do this because of Saudi Arabia?
Did you do this for prisoner exchanges?
And there wasn't a clear answer
because he was very frank
that he didn't think they could dissuade
Saudi Arabia.
Saudi Arabia is going to do
what Saudi Arabia is going to do.
And yeah,
I'm sure they'll want to exchange
these prisoners.
But at the same time,
they this
this attack has brought an enormous,
enormous degree of pain on the Gaza
and part of the Palestinians
living in Gaza.
And when we pressed him
about how the strategic advantages,
the practical strategic
advantage of this attack
could justify that sacrifice,
his answers were very abstract,
very nebulous.
He was really looking towards
a very, very distant horizon.
All he could say was, you know, for years
they've been fighting on our territory
and killing us.
This time
we're fighting on their territory
for the first time, which is a
you know, it's a symbolic
victory of sorts, but it's not much.
We should point out
and you point this out in
in the article in The New Yorker,
which I encourage people to read.
He lied to you.
I mean, he denies
that civilians were targeted.
He denies that the
women and children were slaughtered.
He did say some things,
which we found unconvincing about that.
Yeah.
He said, you know, after the Hamas
fighters came in.
Others came in afterwards.
And it was those others
who did these misdeeds.
Yeah, that's true.
I didn't find that very convincing.
He's certainly
not the first military leader
to try to spin in that way.
If.
Is it clear to you
if Hamas expects Hezbollah
to open up a second front in this war?
It was clear
from what he said that they do not.
You know, obviously this is a war.
There's lots of misinformation.
But he was he seemed very candid.
We said, you know what,
if Hezbollah enters this, well,
what if it becomes a regional conflict?
And he said, quite frankly,
we wish, you know,
if only it could
become a regional conflict.
We would love that.
But we don't see any sign of it.
Hezbollah is going to more or less abide
by its cease fire with Israel, he said.
And he did not expect this war to expand
on that other front.
David Kirkpatrick, thank you so much.
It's good to have you on
the program again.